[ESQL] Update docs on unmapped_fields with NULLIFY/LOAD to match 9.5 behavior (#154300)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-unmapped-fields.md

---
applies_to:

>   stack: preview =9.3, ga 9.5+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  stack: preview 9.3-9.4, ga 9.5+
```

Author: Done.

| Value | What it does | When to use it |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `DEFAULT` | The query fails when it references a field that is not mapped in any queried index. For a partially mapped field, documents from indices where the field is not mapped return `null`. This is the default behavior. | You want strict schema enforcement and prefer an error when a field is completely unmapped. |

> | `NULLIFY` | When a query references a field that is not mapped in any queried index, that field returns `null`. Fully unmapped fields that the query never mentions do not appear in the output. Partially mapped fields behave as they do in `DEFAULT`: documents from indices where the field is not mapped return `null`. | You want a reusable query to continue when a field is not available in a dataset. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `NULLIFY` | When a query references a field that is not mapped in any queried index, that field returns `null`. Fully unmapped fields that the query never mentions do not appear in the output. Partially mapped fields behave as they do in `DEFAULT`: documents from indices where the field is not mapped return `null`. | You want a reusable query to continue working when a field is not available in a dataset. |
```

> | `LOAD` {applies_to}`stack: preview =9.4, ga 9.5+` | When a query references a fully unmapped field, {{esql}} loads it from the stored [`_source`](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md) as `keyword` (or `null` if absent from `_source`). Fully unmapped fields that the query never mentions are not loaded. For a partially mapped field, {{esql}} loads values from `_source` where the field is unmapped, even if the query does not mention the field.<br><br>{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` For a partially mapped field with a non-`keyword` type, `LOAD` converts the loaded values to the field's mapped type where possible. | You need the real values of a fully or partially unmapped field, so that you can filter or aggregate on it. |

Reviewer 2: nit: the type doesn't become `NULL` when a field is neither mapped nor in `_source` - fully unmapped fields are always treated as `KEYWORD`.
```suggestion
| `LOAD` {applies_to}`stack: preview =9.4, ga 9.5+` | When a query references a fully unmapped field, {{esql}} loads it from the stored [`_source`](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md) as `keyword` and fills with the `null` value if absent from `_source`. Fully unmapped fields that the query never mentions are not loaded. For a partially mapped field, {{esql}} loads values from `_source` where the field is unmapped, even if the query does not mention the field.<br><br>{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` For a partially mapped field with a non-`keyword` type, `LOAD` converts the loaded values to the field's mapped type where possible. | You need the real values of a fully or partially unmapped field, so that you can filter or aggregate on it. |
```

:::

## Limitations [esql-unmapped-fields-limitations]

### Performance [esql-unmapped-fields-performance]

`LOAD` reads values from the stored [`_source`](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md). That is slower than querying a mapped field, because the values aren't stored in a data structure optimized for fast access. The trade-off is that the data is available immediately without a full reindex.

Latency is especially high when a filter or sort on an unmapped field cannot be pushed down to Lucene and forces a full scan of the index. For example:

```esql
SET unmapped_fields="load";
FROM idx
| SORT unmapped
| LIMIT 10
```

```esql
SET unmapped_fields="load";
FROM idx
| WHERE unmapped == "foo"
| LIMIT 10
```

In both cases, {{esql}} cannot use a Lucene index on `unmapped`, so it must read documents (and parse `_source` for the loaded field) across the queried data. Large `_source` documents make this even slower. Prefer mapped fields for selective filters and sorts on large indices; use `LOAD` for exploration and for fields you haven't mapped yet.

### Scope of loaded fields [esql-unmapped-fields-scope]

> `LOAD` does not dump every field from `_source`. It loads:

Reviewer 2: nit: what do we mean with `dump`?

Author: Good question 😅.

Reviewer: `s/dump/load`? 😄

Author: Yeah, that's what I'm changing it to :)

- **Partially mapped fields**: if a field is mapped in some queried indices but not others, {{esql}} loads it from `_source` in the indices where it is unmapped. For example, in `FROM idx1, idx2`, a field mapped only in `idx1` is loaded from `idx2` even when the rest of the query never mentions that field.
- **Fully unmapped fields**: fields that are not mapped in any queried index are loaded only when the query references them.

### Other restrictions [esql-unmapped-fields-other-restrictions]

`LOAD` does not support every command, function, and field type. Notable restrictions include:

- [`PROMQL`](commands/promql.md) is not supported with `LOAD`.
- Referencing subfields of [`flattened`](/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/flattened.md) parents is not supported.

> - Partially mapped fields whose type has no implicit conversion from `keyword` (for example `text` or `aggregate_metric_double`) keep their mapped type where mapped and are `null` where unmapped. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+`

Reviewer 2: nit: mention that using an explicit cast (with example) should still work?

Author: Done.

> - Partially mapped fields whose type has no implicit conversion from `keyword` (for example `text` or `aggregate_metric_double`) keep their mapped type where mapped and are `null` where unmapped. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+`

Reviewer 2: nit: we conflate the null type with null values.
```suggestion
- Partially mapped fields whose type has no implicit conversion from `keyword` (for example `text` or `aggregate_metric_double`) keep their mapped type but are not loaded from `_source`. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+`
```
